Automation
==========

gptme can be used to create powerful automated workflows.
This page covers non-interactive usage patterns, CI/CD integration,
and scheduling strategies.

.. contents:: Contents
   :local:
   :depth: 2


Non-Interactive Mode
--------------------

The simplest way to automate gptme is with the ``-n``/``--non-interactive`` flag,
which runs a prompt non-interactively and exits:

.. code-block:: bash

   gptme -n "summarize this" README.md
   gptme -n "what bugs can you spot?" src/main.py

For longer tasks that involve multiple files or steps, chain prompts with ``-``
separators (each ``-`` starts a new turn that triggers another assistant response):

.. code-block:: bash

   gptme -n "read the failing test" - "fix the implementation" - "run the tests"

.. note::

   The ``-n`` / ``--non-interactive`` flag skips all confirmation prompts and
   exits when done. For interactive sessions that start with a pre-filled prompt,
   omit ``-n``.


Capturing Output
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

gptme's non-interactive mode writes assistant responses to stdout:

.. code-block:: bash

   # Save the output to a file
   gptme -n "summarize this codebase in 3 bullet points" README.md > summary.txt

   # Use in a pipeline (mapfile avoids word-splitting on paths with spaces)
   mapfile -t pyfiles < <(find . -name "*.py")
   gptme -n "extract all TODO comments" "${pyfiles[@]}" | tee todos.txt

   # Exit code reflects success (0) or failure (non-zero)
   if gptme -n "run the tests and report pass/fail"; then
       echo "Tests passed"
   fi

   # --output-format json gives structured output (one JSON object per message)
   gptme -n "check the logs" app.log --output-format json


Exit Codes
~~~~~~~~~~

- ``0``: Task completed successfully
- ``1``: Task failed (error during execution)
- ``2``: Invalid arguments


CI/CD Integration
-----------------

GitHub Actions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Run gptme as a step in your GitHub Actions workflow:

.. code-block:: yaml

   name: AI Code Review

   on:
     pull_request:
       types: [opened, synchronize]

   jobs:
     review:
       runs-on: ubuntu-latest
       steps:
         - uses: actions/checkout@v4
           with:
             fetch-depth: 0

         - name: Install gptme
           run: pipx install gptme

         - name: Review PR diff
           env:
             ANTHROPIC_API_KEY: ${{ secrets.ANTHROPIC_API_KEY }}
             GH_TOKEN: ${{ secrets.GITHUB_TOKEN }}
           run: |
             diff=$(gh pr diff ${{ github.event.pull_request.number }})
             review=$(echo "$diff" | gptme -n "Review this PR diff for bugs, code quality issues, and security concerns. Be concise.")
             body="## AI Code Review"$'\n'"$review"$'\n'"*Generated by gptme*"
             gh pr comment ${{ github.event.pull_request.number }} --body "$body"

.. note::

   Store your API key (e.g. ``ANTHROPIC_API_KEY``) as a GitHub secret.
   Never hard-code keys in workflow files.

Pre-commit Hook
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Use gptme as a pre-commit hook to catch issues before they land:

.. code-block:: bash

   # .git/hooks/pre-commit
   #!/bin/bash
   set -e

   # Only run on staged Python files
   mapfile -t staged < <(git diff --cached --name-only --diff-filter=ACM | grep '\.py$')
   [ ${#staged[@]} -eq 0 ] && exit 0

   echo "Running AI review on staged files..."
   issues=$(gptme -n "List any bugs or serious issues in these files. Output nothing if clean." "${staged[@]}")

   if [ -n "$issues" ]; then
       echo "⚠️  Potential issues found:"
       echo "$issues"
       echo ""
       echo "Review and fix before committing, or use git commit --no-verify to skip."
       exit 1
   fi

Make this executable with ``chmod +x .git/hooks/pre-commit``.


Example: Implement Feature from Issue
--------------------------------------

Given a GitHub issue URL, this script checks out a branch, implements the
feature, runs tests, and creates a pull request:

.. code-block:: bash

   #!/bin/bash
   # Usage: ./implement-issue.sh <issue-url>
   set -e

   issue_url=$1
   issue_number=$(echo "$issue_url" | grep -oE '[0-9]+$')

   gptme -n "Read this GitHub issue: $issue_url" \
         - "Create a new branch called fix/issue-$issue_number" \
         - "Look up the relevant source files for this issue" \
         - "Implement the fix described in the issue" \
         - "Run the tests to make sure nothing is broken" \
         - "Create a pull request that closes issue #$issue_number"


.. include:: automation/example_code_review.rst

.. include:: automation/example_activity_summary.rst


Scheduled Automation
--------------------

cron
~~~~

Run gptme on a schedule using cron:

.. code-block:: bash

   # Edit your crontab
   crontab -e

   # Run a daily summary every day at 8 AM
   0 8 * * * cd /path/to/project && gptme -n "summarize yesterday's git activity and open issues" >> /var/log/gptme-daily.log 2>&1

   # Weekly dependency audit every Monday at 9 AM
   0 9 * * 1 cd /path/to/project && gptme -n "check for outdated dependencies and security advisories. Output a summary." >> /var/log/gptme-weekly.log 2>&1

systemd Timer
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

For more robust scheduling, use systemd user timers:

.. code-block:: ini

   # ~/.config/systemd/user/gptme-daily.service
   [Unit]
   Description=Daily gptme summary

   [Service]
   Type=oneshot
   WorkingDirectory=%h/myproject
   Environment=ANTHROPIC_API_KEY=<your-key>
   ExecStart=gptme -n "summarize today's commits and open issues"
   StandardOutput=append:%h/logs/gptme-daily.log

.. code-block:: ini

   # ~/.config/systemd/user/gptme-daily.timer
   [Unit]
   Description=Run gptme daily summary

   [Timer]
   OnCalendar=daily
   Persistent=true

   [Install]
   WantedBy=timers.target

Enable with:

.. code-block:: bash

   systemctl --user enable --now gptme-daily.timer


Multi-Step Pipelines
--------------------

String together multiple gptme invocations for complex workflows:

.. code-block:: bash

   #!/bin/bash
   # Automated test-and-fix loop
   set -euo pipefail

   MAX_ATTEMPTS=3
   attempt=0

   while [ $attempt -lt $MAX_ATTEMPTS ]; do
       attempt=$((attempt + 1))
       echo "Attempt $attempt/$MAX_ATTEMPTS"

       # Run tests, capture failures
       test_output=$(python -m pytest --tb=short 2>&1 || true)

       # Check if tests passed
       if echo "$test_output" | grep -q "passed" && ! echo "$test_output" | grep -q "failed"; then
           echo "✅ All tests pass"
           exit 0
       fi

       # Let gptme diagnose and fix (|| true prevents set -e from aborting the loop on gptme failure)
       echo "$test_output" | gptme -n "These tests are failing. Diagnose the root cause and fix it." || true
   done

   echo "❌ Could not fix tests after $MAX_ATTEMPTS attempts"
   exit 1


Using gptme as a Library
-------------------------

For tighter integration, use the gptme Python API directly:

.. code-block:: python

   import subprocess
   import json

   # Run gptme non-interactively and capture structured output
   result = subprocess.run(
       ["gptme", "-n", "--output-format", "json",
        "List the files in the current directory"],
       capture_output=True,
       text=True,
   )
   for line in result.stdout.splitlines():
       if not line.strip():
           continue
       msg = json.loads(line)
       if msg.get("role") == "assistant":
           print(msg.get("content", ""))

See the :doc:`api` reference for the full Python interface.


Best Practices
--------------

**Be specific in prompts**: Vague prompts lead to vague actions.
Instead of "fix issues", try "fix the type error in ``src/user.py`` line 42".

**Use ``-n`` / ``--non-interactive`` explicitly**: When running in scripts,
pass ``-n`` to ensure non-interactive mode is always active.

**Limit tool access**: Use ``TOOL_ALLOWLIST`` to restrict which tools
gptme can use in automated contexts:

.. code-block:: bash

   TOOL_ALLOWLIST=read,shell gptme -n "audit the codebase for security issues"

**Log everything**: Redirect stdout and stderr to log files so you
can review what gptme did:

.. code-block:: bash

   gptme -n "task" >> /var/log/gptme.log 2>&1

**Test your prompts interactively first**: Run the prompt interactively
to verify it works before automating it.

**Handle errors**: Always check exit codes in scripts.
gptme exits non-zero if it cannot complete the task.
